>> Hello, YouTube.
Hello, Effect.
How are you doing?
>> Hey, I'm good.
How are you today?
>> I'm doing really well.
I'm excited to have you back on the podcast.
And before we jump into it, I see we already have some chat out there in the audience.
So thank you for throwing these in.
Some of these questions are going to be great.
I'll ask them as we go and when it makes sense.
But if you're out there watching live, please put your comments into the live chat so we can make them part of the show.
part of the show. And if you're watching later, thanks for coming by. And with that, let's kick
it off. Ophek, welcome to Talk Python to Me. >> Thank you. Good to be here.
>> It's been a long time. At least a week since you've been on the show.
>> Yep. Just about a week. >> Welcome back. In that appearance,
it was a big panel of many of us talking about Python packaging.
>> Yeah. >> And you're the author of Hatch and
and Hatchling and a really interesting take
on that tooling story.
So I thought it'd be fun to go ahead
and just dive into that in particular for this episode
and get your thoughts on it.
So I'm looking forward to talking about Hatch.
- Yeah, sounds fun.
- Yeah, it will be fun.
Before we get into it though,
a lot of people maybe don't know you out there.
What's your background?
How did you get into programming in Python?
Those sorts of things.
Let us know.
Yeah, so I guess originally, this was like maybe 15 years ago now, I was just automating
stuff that I was doing every day.
So for me personally, I have a condition that makes me kind of weak, so all I can use is
like a mouse, therefore I type pretty slow.
So I was automating sentences, templating for like sending emails.
like the traditional developer mindset. If you're doing anything more than once or twice,
just write a script for it. So I had like dozens or maybe even 100 scripts just to automate like
boring stuff. Kind of like the book, which I've never read the book, I would make the boring
stuff. But I imagine it's what I was doing. That's how I originally got into Python.
Excellent. You were doing the traditional developer thing. Why spend 20 minutes doing
when you can spend two weeks automating it.
(laughing)
Just kidding.
Like, honestly, I really think that that's a huge value.
There's so many people out there,
probably many people even listen to this podcast
where they don't consider themselves developers,
but there's like little things that could be automated
that are super annoying.
You don't look forward to it, right?
Just a little bit of programming skill
will let you really blaze through those things.
Plus it also gets you further into Python
where maybe one day you're releasing tools
to manage everyone else's Python projects.
- Yep, for sure.
- You don't know where it's gonna go, right?
- Yep, and yeah, now I work at Datadog
working on agent interventions.
So it's like the thing that you physically install
on your server host, it ships out of the box
with like almost 200 integrations,
like connecting to databases like Postgres
or monitoring like Windows APIs
or hypervisors like vSphere,
pretty much whatever our customers want to monitor.
It's our job to like find a way to connect to it
and provide useful data.
So I love to research into every product
that we integrate with.
Sometimes the documentation is kind of sparse.
So it's lots of investigative work.
- Yeah, I can imagine.
That sounds really fun.
And I can see that as a follow-on
from the way you got started as well, right?
Automating a bunch of tasks is not that different
from kind of automating integration
with a hundred different apps and performance counters
and laws and different things, right?
- Yeah, yeah, definitely.
- Cool.
Is that part of the application performance monitoring
type thing?
Are there--
- We do that as well.
That's not my team, but yeah.
That's probably what we do.
- Yeah, excellent.
All right, well, let's go ahead and dive in.
- Sure.
- So as I said, if people wanna check it out,
you are on the Python packaging discussion.
And over there was a broad conversation
with a bunch of core developers
and other interested folks, building tools like HAT and so on,
about where are we with packaging?
Because a little while ago, I remember packaging mostly felt like pip instead of tools,
maybe distutil, something like that.
And then it kind of got unlocked, this separation of like the build backends and stuff.
And then many people started creating things.
We had pip env, we have poetry, we have PDM.
There's a bunch of different ones
and hatches amongst them, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so let's set the stage by just talking about,
first of all, what do we mean
when we're talking about Python packaging?
And I'll ask you for you, right?
Like it might mean something different for me
than it might mean for you
and it might be different for someone else as well.
But let's just start with, you know, when we talk packaging,
is that getting libraries to devs?
Is that developers deploying their apps to servers?
Or is that me sending an executable end product
to a desktop?
Like, what does it mean?
- Yeah, that's a good question.
I would say all of those are packaging.
Historically though, we've mostly put our efforts
toward the first one, which is basically like a developer
making a library and making that really simple
for other developers to use that library.
And so in the form of wheels being hosted on PyPI
in particular, that's what we put our efforts on,
which I think either way you look at it
was the right choice to focus on in the beginning.
'Cause like either way, like from either first principles
or even hindsight, looking back,
you can't build a community without packages
and being able to get packages and distribute packages.
So I think that was the right choice.
And I think now we're trying to satisfy other use cases,
notably applications, I guess.
- Yeah, I mean, we even have an XKCD for it, right?
- True.
- And I don't know how many people know this.
If you're in the Python REPL,
you can type import anti-gravity
And actually, it does something.
So the old XKCD is there's a person flying
and the person on the ground looks at us,
"How are you flying?"
"Python, just learned it last night.
Everything's so simple.
Hello world is just print, hello world."
The person on the ground says, "I don't know,
dynamic typing, white space."
"Come on, join us, programming's fun again."
"Okay, but how are you flying?"
"I just typed import anti-gravity."
Right?
And it's a great joke,
But honestly, that is one of the superpowers of Python
is that, how many things do we have right now?
How many packages?
436,000 packages, like insane.
It's just insane.
- Yeah, no, it's a massive community
and really all kinds of domains from doing,
as we talked about automating scripts,
in different tasks to doing like computing for whether, you know, biomedical stuff, you
know, even embedded devices now with like a micro Python, stuff like that. So it's, yeah,
users of Python do everything pretty much.
Yeah. I think in the near term, we're going to be talking about front end web as well
with
Yes.
And PyScript showed the possibilities,
but I recently had a show on PyScript intersection
with MicroPython, and that starts to be like,
well, here's a couple hundred K download,
and now you got Python in the front end.
What do you think about it now?
But of course, that has its own packaging
and distribution story that we're gonna have
to think about as well.
Like, well, kind of like Node modules,
now what do you do with packages
that gotta run on the front end?
This is getting weird.
- Yeah, and that kind of goes to, you know,
talking about like how hard it is to do packaging
when you have, you know, dozens of use cases
that we have to satisfy.
And with us being mostly just volunteers
in our free time trying to do everything.
So yeah, it's fun and also challenging.
Yeah.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Another area, another thing we could consider
could be Conda, right?
actually, I got that below over here.
Could be Conda, right?
This is a completely different take on pip and wheels.
- Yeah, yeah, Conda is pretty cool.
I think Conda, if I have my history right,
it came about because there really was no packaging story
some time ago.
So Conda, I think was made by Peter Yang,
if I remember correctly.
And he has a whole company now around it,
supporting Conda.
And yeah, it just makes it easy to install
very complex stuff.
So if your package depends on--
yeah, you can put in Fortran and Rust and all kinds of stuff,
and it just magically builds it, and you
can install it pretty easily.
Yeah, it's pretty impressive.
>>It is pretty impressive.
And with wheels now, it's closer, what we do with pip.
It used to be setup.py would run
and whatever it needed to do, it would do.
But often that would require, well, compile this.
Usually it was C back then,
but for the scientific libraries,
it says, well, compile this thing with Fortran
and then compile this thing with Scala.
You're like, I have neither of those things set up
as dev tools on my environment.
I'm a science student.
What am I doing here?
Right?
And so that was the angle they were solving.
And I think pip and Conda are coming a little bit closer
together.
I think they're not necessarily converging,
but they're more similar now than they used to be.
>>Yeah, definitely.
That is true.
And yeah, there is talk on--
I don't know how many people are aware,
but the Python forums has a subsection
on discourse for packaging.
So yeah, right now there's actually
talks from people at Conda trying
to decide how we can kind of provide a more unified experience.
Because right now, Conda has their own repo, like for all their packages, and PyPI is its
own thing outside of Conda.
So yeah, there's talk about possibly making that like, like interoperable.
Oh, yeah.
Okay, that'd be really interesting.
Let's see, there was a question out here from Copa.
It says, "In this realm, what do you think about Docker
as a way of shipping things?"
You know, a lot of times we'll get checkout,
get clone, some code on a server,
maybe some production branch,
and then go through these steps, right?
Pip install requirements
or the hatch run type of initialization.
Or you just get that done in a Docker container
and you just hand that out.
What are your thoughts on Docker as part of this?
- Yeah, Docker definitely has its use cases.
Like I guess in lieu of the black file,
you can kind of use Docker
as a reproducible environment.
But I still think there's a place
for a way to actually build applications
and outside of Docker, outside of containers
in a reproducible fashion.
I think that's still necessary.
- I do as well.
So Docker really,
it addresses some of the types of packaging
that we discussed really, really well.
For example, I need to get my running code onto a server,
but Docker is less good.
It's not completely irrelevant,
but it's less good at giving a developer a library, right?
If the people that make HTTPX
and the people that make fast API,
they're not gonna build a combo Docker, right?
There's still a place where you've just gotta get the things
and that's like a base level closer
to where a hatch might be working.
And also Docker is not fantastic at sending to an end user.
If I wanna build an app that a non-technical,
non-developer person can use,
Docker is the opposite of what they want.
- Yeah, true.
I will say there's another use case,
which is like if your machine is like messed up somehow
and some library package isn't working,
I've had this happen with my coworkers on their Macs,
it is nice to be able to just go into the container
and start fresh.
So I've had that happen a few times.
- Yeah, it is isolated in quite a good way
and that's pretty excellent.
So on that packaging panel that we were on,
There was a really interesting focus for a little bit
talking about, well, what is responsible for what?
So right now, for example, I might use Pip
as a way to add tools to Python to a Python project,
but I'll have to already have Python there.
And in other communities,
and even a little bit like Conda in this as well,
there's tools that will say,
what you do is use a tool kind of like pip,
but it gets you the runtime.
It would get you a version of Python you asked for
plus the libraries.
You know, I think Rust up was one of the things
that was brought up there, right?
So for people who don't know Rust up,
it's an installer for basically setting up
a Rust environment for doing Rust.
So pip up, Python up, I don't know.
I don't know what we would call it.
But do you want to just maybe give your thoughts on that?
'Cause I think you had some comments on that.
Like inside out, outside in, if you could start fresh,
where were the tools, how would that work?
- Yeah, I think if we were to start fresh,
I think the way Rust does it is like now the gold standard.
It's probably the best way to do it, which is how,
As you mentioned, Conda, that's a similar thing,
where you have a tool that you download,
and that one tool is in charge of managing
the various Python or programming language versions.
So if I were to start fresh,
you would have a tool like Catch
that you would download as an MSI or EXE
or some kind of installer, similar to Ruststep.
And then that tool would manage the various Python versions
and environments and packaging.
So for Rustup, when you download this,
it gives you Rustup, which manages Rust,
but then it gives you Cargo, which is a separate command,
and that's their package manager.
- Right. - But in both cases,
they live outside of Python.
Yeah. - Interesting.
Yeah, Cargo is to Rust as pip is to Python, right?
that, yeah. - Right, right.
- Okay, so I think that's pretty helpful
because one of the problems is,
well, you need to pip install this thing.
Oh, do you have the wrong version of Python?
Well, you gotta, you know, there's a lot of steps back
and there's no immediately obvious command
other than completely from scratch install a new Python.
- Yeah. - There's other,
there's tools that manage that, right?
like pyenv can work, although I've had trouble with it.
- Yeah, I've had issues with that.
Yeah, I think it would be less error-prone
in this hypothetical way,
where the tool doesn't mess with your shell
in a global manner.
It just has its own paths to Python
and just does everything by itself.
- That's interesting.
And that starts to maybe make it easier to solve the,
I want to ship you an executable binary,
is if the tool were in charge of,
I create this working directory
where part of the things I've installed
is all of Python and all the packages you've asked me for,
I can see how that pretty quickly becomes something
I'll bundle that up and hand it to somebody
and give them an entry point.
- Yeah, definitely I could help that situation.
I think there's not really a standard way
to build an AXE from like a Python package.
There are a few tools like PyOxidizer is one newer option.
PyInstaller, CXFreeze, I think was the thing
that I've used before.
So there's a few options.
- Yeah, I've used Py2App
and that's actually worked really well.
I've used PyInstaller and it's worked mostly well
except for I've had weird situations
where on Windows it's great,
but on Mac, it has a dangling terminal
in addition to the GUI.
I'm like, what are we supposed to do that?
How do we make it go away?
Like, you know, here's the command.
Like, no, it's not going away.
I don't know why.
And if there was a more official
sort of core dev organized way,
that would make me super happy.
- Yeah.
Yeah, I'm not so much like for official or unofficial.
Like my view is like, if it works, it works.
So as long as it's satisfying,
You know, in all these cases, that's what I would push for.
So I think right now, based on what I've used personally,
I think PyOxidizer would be the best choice
for distributing standalone apps.
- Interesting, okay.
All right, cool.
Well, let's move on and start talking about Hatch.
So first off, why'd you build it, right?
We had Pip.
- Why do we need Hatch?
And I don't know exactly the timeframe of when it came out.
So maybe we had other things like poetry or,
why'd you go and create this?
- So Hatch, I did, it was kind of an older project
back in the end of 2016 or early 2017.
I wasn't pleased with like the tooling in Python.
I think very similar to the author of poetry.
That's kind of why he made poetry.
So I wanted something that kind of matched my mental model
of how development would go with building packages
and managing environments automatically, stuff like that.
When I made it, though, there weren't very many standards
for packaging, and everything was kind of in limbo
at that point, which kind of discouraged me
from continuing, because then I was like, OK, in six months
or a year or two, I'm going to have
to rewrite to follow standards.
So I kind of just stopped development for a few years
until everything was standardized.
And then I rewrote it about a year and a half ago
with this new version and new docs.
So that's kind of the history of it.
Yeah, I saw that there's a hash.toml and a pyproject.toml,
and you can use either of them.
Was your hatch.toml the original,
and then pyproject.toml gained traction,
and you're like, all right, well,
we'll integrate with that as well?
- No, hatch came, hatch.toml came with the rewrite.
It's mostly for environments.
Sometimes when you define lots of environments,
it's very verbose.
Like at my workplace, I saw a top,
like over a thousand lines.
So putting that in PyProject wouldn't be very nice.
So that's why I have a second file.
So I still use it.
- Yeah, yeah, it makes sense.
Just like maybe you don't want to write
your entire application in an app.py,
but maybe have multiple files, yeah, something like that.
All right, well, out in the audience,
we've got some kind words.
Like, "I switched to Hatch and pip-tools from Poetry
"and love it."
That's pretty awesome. - Nice.
- Yeah.
And then probably before I forget,
because it was right at the top of the conversation.
Marwan asks, is there a time estimate
for when a hatch might support things like lock files?
That's a good question.
So my goal is by PyCon to write the plugin
interface for locking.
So the first version, we use pip tools, actually.
That would be the first plugin for lock files.
But I won't be writing an actual lock file spec.
I'll just be using an existing tool.
The new hypothetical lock file is kind of blocked on Brett
because he has most context.
So yeah, I'm waiting on Brett, basically.
Got it.
That being Brett Cannon.
- Yes, yeah.
- Python developer extraordinaire, we all know.
Okay, very cool.
Other thing before we dive into it here,
I see that you have some rough action going there.
I just had Charlie on the show,
not too long ago to talk about rough.
It's pretty impressive.
When did you adopt that?
- I was an early adopter.
I guess a few months ago now, yeah.
- Yeah, what's your experience?
- It's fantastic.
It's kind of like a meme to say it now, but it's true.
Like it's so fast, it's almost like you wonder
if it's doing anything.
- Yeah, that was my first thought.
When I ran it, I'm like, wait a minute,
maybe I didn't give it any files or something.
'Cause I ran it on Talk Python Training,
which is like 20,000 lines of Python code.
And it just, it's like, bam, like that.
I'm like, maybe it didn't take that
because that seems like that should take a moment
>> Yeah, it's very great.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah, all in one location,
and it supports so many options as well, which is nice.
>> Yeah, indeed. Cool, cool.
All right.
Well, let's start with a high-level overview.
And then what I want to do is I want to walk through creating a project with this,
and I've got questions and thoughts as I experience Hatch for the first time,
for the first time, but for somewhat of a newbie
perspective.
So I think we'll do that.
But let's start with the high-level features.
>>Aaron: OK.
>>Victor: Yeah.
>>Aaron: So I guess the first--
I'll just go point by point.
So the build system--
so the Hatch project is, I guess,
conceptually two different projects.
Hatch itself is the command line.
So doing publishing and environment management,
versioning, stuff like that.
Then Hatchling is the build system,
similar to a Flit or SetupTools.
So that's where the build system is.
- You can use it independently, right?
You don't have to be doing anything with Hatch
to use Hatchling.
Basically, it will replace setup.py, right?
Yeah, you can replace the .py with the pyproject.toml.
Yeah.
And most people do use Hatchling and not use Hatch.
So yeah, Hatchling is much more popular than Hatch itself.
Yeah.
Right.
OK.
So for a config, it's a bit more simple than a set of tools.
The default logic makes more sense for new users,
especially.
it's hard to mess up packaging with Hatchling.
Yeah.
- Yeah, excellent.
So I could have just some random Python project
that I've put together with a pyproject.toml
I wrote by hand and I just put Hatchling
in as the build subsystem to make the wheels
and whatnot, right?
- Yeah, and one benefit of Hatchling,
I hatched two, basically everything is a plugin.
So you can have like a build hook that does
like mypyC, which we have, you can have a metadata hook
where you insert like project URLs
from some arbitrary location,
pretty much everything you can plug into and modify.
- Yeah, excellent.
All right, and then a robust environment management.
- Yeah, so for this, this you can think of as TOCs or NOCs.
similar in spirit to that. The difference is NOX and TOX kind of treat environments
as applications where an environment is tied to a command and you run an environment. Whereas
in Hatch, you have environments that you define and then within that, you have scripts that
you can run. So you can have a style environment that might be able to rent with one script
or run the formatter to change the code with another script. An environment itself isn't
actually like an app. You can run arbitrary commands.
Got it. Right. Like I could run hatch test or something
like that, yeah? And passing flags, yeah.
- Okay, and then often people published packages to PyPI.
They've done this with Twine or some tool like that.
And Hatch has that capability as well, right?
- Right, yeah, to PyPI or some private,
corporate owned index, yeah.
- I think those are probably getting to be more popular
than they used to be with all the supply chain silliness.
- Yeah, that's true.
- Yeah, yeah.
Do you have any visibility into how people are using it,
whether it's public or private or?
- As far as Hatch?
- Yeah, well, how they're using Hatch to publish.
Do you have any visibility whether they're publishing
to PyPI or to some kind of private index?
- Based on the issues I have open like future requests,
most are talking about private indices, actually.
- Interesting.
It's probably those are the ones where the edge cases live.
- True.
- Standard one place is dialed in.
And what if mine's on using Active Directory
for authentication as I publish it?
It's doing what?
- Yeah, I know Artifactory is quite popular as well.
- Yeah, yeah, that absolutely is.
Another thing that was interesting
is you have the ability to do version management.
As we'll see in just a minute,
you can say like, what version is my package?
increment the build, do a major version increment,
or put it into a release candidate mode?
- Yeah, and this is Plugged Pool as well.
So there's one plugin that's popular
that wraps Setup Tools SCM,
which doesn't actually depend on Setup Tools anymore.
It's just in name, it's still called that.
So that pulls your version from Git,
or Mercurial, or Subversion,
And you can source the versions that way as well.
- Interesting.
I really like that.
I think that's a neat aspect.
And then configurable project generation,
we're seeing defaults.
- Yeah, I don't have too many options with this yet,
but you can make it a flat layout
or like a source directory.
There's an option to add tests,
which puts more stuff in your pyproject.toml,
you can add a CLI, which has a very simple template
for GitHub Actions.
And then there's a flag for a CLI that will give you a click
and set up a command line for your package.
I don't know how directly related this is to anything
that Hatch does, but the usage of the pyproject.toml
and then building it as a package,
something you could install.
Gives you a really nice way to create a global CLI, right?
Which is the entry points in the pyproject.toml.
- Yep, yep, that's what that CLI flag does.
Yeah, it's very nice.
- Okay, yeah.
Then also you say it's two to three times faster
than equivalent tools.
That's great.
- Yeah, it's really just one trick.
It's just, I make the code not as readable
by using lazy imports everywhere.
I just put lazy imports and that's why it's faster.
- Okay.
Yeah, because there's a lot of execution paths
that only use some of the imports in effect, right?
- Yeah.
- Cool.
Let's see.
Going back to the scripts, Jonathan points out,
"I love the custom scripts within Hatch.
"It makes creating build pipelines way easier
"and moves most of the logic within the Hatch configure
rather than spreading them around multiple files,
which is, that's pretty cool.
- Nice.
Yeah, that's what I do as well.
- Yeah, cool.
- I even use Hatch for non-Python projects,
just for the scripting ability, yeah.
- Yeah, cool.
Well, I mean, Python traditionally had been used
for a lot of the, you know, called it glue code, right?
A lot of, well, I really wanna do these other things
with these other systems and scripts,
but let me kind of orchestrate that in Python,
and that sounds a bit...
A bit like that.
- Yeah.
- Let's do a little walkthrough, I think.
I think that'll be fun.
- Sure.
- First of all, I think this is just MK docs,
but thank you for pointing it out
that your documentation and your website here
have hotkeys.
- Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, this is MK docs with the material theme,
which is very nice.
- Yeah, so it turns out if I just press a dot,
it goes to the next page.
if I comment it goes to the previous page and yeah it's actually it's really
nice it is really nice and before we leave this front page one other thing to
note to go back to the top just because I'm very happy with it the logo was
actually generated by Dolly the AI okay yeah fantastic yeah generate logo and
And then I had a brother of a friend from work
I like actually touch it up.
So, yeah.
- It's a really cool logo.
I like it.
I didn't catch on that it was made by Dolly,
but now I see that.
I've been doing a lot with Mid Journey
and I think these AI tools are,
I think they're a little bit fraught
with maybe a few moral issues about like,
well, did you really train it on stuff
that you were allowed to train on?
But putting that aside, if they exist,
Assuming just they exist, they're really neat,
and there's really amazing stuff you can do with them.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, cool.
I guess maybe a quick sidebar there is
if you were a project maintainer out there
and you don't really have a logo,
drop in on DALI or MidJourney
and spend half an hour and you probably will.
But I just think there are so many people
that build web apps out there
that don't put hotkeys into them,
and it is not that hard,
and it is such a nice experience,
and it brings you so much closer
to a native app type of experience.
Please, put some hotkeys out there for us.
All right, so pressing dot takes us to the first one.
So installing Hatch, obviously you can pip install it.
However, you offer some interesting other areas
I wanna talk about.
First of all, my favorite, pipx.
I love pipx.
If you've got a tool that you don't directly import
into your code that does stuff against your Python apps,
Boy, PipX is almost always a good choice.
What do you think?
- Oh yeah, PipX is awesome.
Yeah.
Yeah, it just allows you to provide isolated apps,
for command line apps.
It manages everything
and you don't even have to think about it.
- Yeah, it just creates its own little environment
and you can say upgrade all my installed CLI tools.
It's like package manager,
if the thing that it's managing is built with Python.
It's great.
I had chat on the creator of PIVX a while ago.
So people, if they want to hear more about it,
they can listen to that show.
Homebrew, good.
Conda brew, Mac ports is interesting.
But the one that stood out to me was Mamba.
I'm like, wait, what's Mamba?
- Yeah, I think it's a,
so, so there's a few-
- I hadn't heard of that, but yeah.
- Yeah, I don't use Conda that much,
but as far as I know,
there's a few different distributions of conda. So there's anaconda, which gives you like
a over a gigabyte installed, like massive scientific computing. There's mini conda,
and mini conda gives you just the bare minimum conda CLI with like package management. And
that's what most people use, I think. But now there's mamba, which is like mini conda,
But it pulls from a conda forge by default and conda forge
It's sort of like our pipe. Yeah where anybody can contribute their own packages
So I think that's the main difference
Yeah, it is faster and it was rewritten
That's what mama is. It's a re-implementation of conda
the conda package manager and C++ doing parallel downloading and
other bits of that, which is interesting.
Cool.
Well, I don't use either all that much,
but it's still kind of cool to see there.
So you could Mamba install Hatch
if that was your workflow as well, right?
- Yeah.
- Okay, so installing it pretty easy.
If you were to do it,
if somebody gave you a blank machine
and said, "Set this up to use Hatch," what would you do?
- For now, I would do PipX.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- Okay.
- In future, like we talked about in the beginning,
I plan to have like an actual executable
that does the work, like Python does.
But until then, then probably PIPX, yeah.
- Okay, so maybe then it would be Homebrew and Winget
and things like the higher level OS ones, okay.
All right, so the way we get started,
if we just say Hatch new,
and I thought one of the things
I don't normally do here on the podcast,
but I think it might be fun,
is just to kind of go through these steps here
to see what it's like to get a sense,
because then I can ask questions.
So I'll say, hatch new calc.
I'll call my little app calc.
And tell us about what we get when we run that.
Sure, so it makes your package as you named it
with about.py and in it.py.
The in it.py obviously makes it--
turns that directory into a Python package.
The about.py stores the version by default,
and that's where it reads it by default.
It gives you, oh yeah, go ahead.
- Well, I was just gonna say,
one of the things I can type now is hatch version,
and it gives me,
it gives me, basically pulls out the version
of about.py, right?
- Yep.
Yeah, and you can, if you do the same command again,
but pass in R like minor, then it can bump it as well.
- Okay, yeah, so the old version is what it says,
is 001, new version is 010.
Can I say build and get 11, something like that?
No, what would I type to change the last one?
- RC, do RC.
- Yeah, okay.
- Yeah, it's documented to allow arguments as well.
- Got it, make sure.
So yeah, then it also gives you a test directory
that doesn't have any predefined tests,
but you can add tests to it.
And then the most important part is the pyproject.toml,
which has your metadata and your other config.
- Right.
So it's got the build system set to be Hatchling,
and then it's got all the project settings,
like who is the author,
what are the requirements, and all that stuff, right?
- Yep, and from the authored,
it would have gotten that from Git.
The default comes from Git,
so that's why it has the right stuff for you.
And then down here is testing,
so some cover stuff and environments.
- When I type patch new,
could I have made it ask me those questions
like who are you and stuff?
- There is an interactive mode, yeah.
- Okay, yeah.
Yeah, so you also, as part of this pyproject.toml,
you create some of these commands.
These are the scripts you were talking about a little bit,
right? - Yeah.
- Like you've got the test and other options you can run.
- Yeah, so this default example down there
has environment, which is just default,
which is a little bit special.
It just means you'll have to add a prefix
on the command line.
And so there's two scripts by default,
a cov, so you could do like a hatch run cov,
and it would run pytest with coverage.
And then another command is no-cov.
- Yeah, I can do hatch test, hatch run test.
That a thing?
- There is no test command.
You could do pytest.
- Okay.
- So if you do hatch run pytest, you could, yeah.
Yeah, excellent.
That's really cool.
Yeah, so it basically creates the structure for you.
And the workflow that we just discussed
would be if I've got a folder and I want to start from absolute scratch,
I want to create the entire directory structure through a hatch.
But there's also a way I can go to an existing one
and convert it to hatch or upgrade it to hatch, right?
>> Yes. Me and other contributors have done it so much that most of the edge cases are gone.
So it can take pretty much any setup.py and turn it
into a Hatch PyProject.toml.
It's pretty good now.
OK, and because it doesn't actually
need Hatch the CLI, the environment tool to do that,
to run and build, you could just use that to get your PyProject.toml
out and use Hatchling as a build engine, right?
but still just keep going.
Yeah. - Yeah, exactly.
- Okay, so people are sitting out there like,
I really should be using pyproject.toml,
but you know, inertia, I don't really wanna do it.
Like, hatch new init might do it, right?
- Yeah, yeah, that's not true.
Before you time out, if you do which Python,
maybe I can just illustrate something.
- Hold on, I edited that one, there you go.
- Okay, and if you do hatch run,
which Python three, it will show you that it's actually
in a managed virtual environment.
- Yeah, okay.
So it's created a virtual environment over in,
at least for me, library application support,
hatch environments and so on, based on the project name.
And then it has some big long deal on that.
- It does, yeah.
- Yeah, so. - It's just a checksum.
- Okay, what is that checksum based on?
The reason I ask is, what do I change
to make this no longer work?
What--
[LAUGHTER]
So I do that because it's possible that somewhere else
on your machine, you might have another project, maybe
a fork of Kalki with the same name.
So I have to add a hash.
It's a very popular library, so it's likely.
So that's why I do that, yeah.
I see, OK.
That's like a hash of the path to where the project is.
Right, exactly.
OK.
So a lot of projects, a lot of management tools
work this way, Conda works this way, for example,
where there's some other place
where the virtual environments live.
Is there a way, you know, another workflow
that's pretty common is to have the virtual environment
in a VNV folder at the root of the project.
Is there a way when I create my project to say,
I want a local ENV?
- Not at project creation time,
but there is a way in either HatchConfig
or in pyproject.toml.
they're able to change that.
Yeah.
And that was just documented on the site.
- Yeah. Okay.
And so, yeah, the hatch config is one of the things
I would do.
There's a lot of cool, like CLI tools where you can ask it
to like, show me the details of whatever it is.
So what would I put say into the config to say,
create my VE and V locally and call it what?
Is it this dirs-vee-e-e?
- Yeah, there's an env.
- Yeah, env.
What would I put in there?
- You would have a subtable for virtual
and then have the path be just .vend basically.
- Right, okay, so like a ./,
whatever you want to call it locally.
- Yeah.
- Is this, I guess I could do hatch find config
or config find, I guess.
- Config find. - Config find.
- Right, and that will, so this is a global,
like how do my projects get started using Hatch
from my machine, not a per project deal, right?
- Yeah.
- That's cool.
So kind of like get config, once I set up my machine,
if I say, well, I like my virtual environments like this,
then I'll be okay, right?
- Yeah, it makes it easier to distribute tooling,
like for if you're managing like some corporate environment
where you're using Hatch for everything,
then it's nice to have a config that you can modify
just as a machine level,
then every project will do the same behavior.
- Just as a team to say, look, we always want tests.
We always want this other thing that we call it,
that we always want this default library.
Sorry, we want this default license, right?
We don't want MIT, we want, you know,
corp.inc or whatever license that we use.
- So a quick question from ZL out there, I think is relevant.
Is this useful for application development, not libraries?
- I would say it is.
- Like a Flask app or a fast API app, like would this be relevant?
- Yeah.
So especially with the environment management, that's kind of what
applications we use anyway.
The missing feature, of course, like the other person asked,
is the lock files.
For any app, you're going to want
to be able to reproducibly build the app.
So right now, there's not a way built in,
other than using an environment with like pip tools
or something.
So I'm going to add that plugin interface soon.
Yeah.
Interesting.
Does pip tools work with pyproject.toml?
Do you know?
It does now.
Yeah, it does.
OK.
Yeah, I've only used it with requirements.in and then generate the requirements.txt, but
interesting. Yeah, they added that last summer, I think. Yeah. I'm so behind the times on this.
You know, these workflows, I'm sort of joking, but also not. These workflows, you kind of get
into like, well, here's how I build these apps. Here's how I manage my requirements. And then you
just, you know, tunnel. I think a lot of people just go, okay, well, that's working for me. I'm
I'm doing that, you know?
- Yeah, me too, me too.
- Yeah, yeah.
And then so if I want to,
so for example, when I asked which Python,
it said the one from Homebrew you've installed, Sili,
of course, that's your global Python.
If I want to activate a virtual environment,
if I want to get into like this application mode,
I would do a Hatch Shell, right?
- Yes.
- And because I have an awesome, oh my posh,
you can see my prompt here is now taking on the calc
E3.11.2 environment as part of my prompt.
So, yeah, that's the one.
So it's working now if I ask just straight up,
which Python, a virtual environment one, right?
- Yeah.
- And I can do pip list and so on,
but there's also ways I think I recall in Hatch
to like show me my dependencies and get a list of.
So how do I?
- Patch, dep, show.
- Dep, show.
- Yeah.
- Is it show, dep?
- Table.
- So three different options, yeah.
- Yeah, okay.
- That's your environment.
- Yeah, so these, I only have right now two dependencies,
pytest and pytest-cov.
- Yeah.
- Or I could do requirement.
- Yep, and that would spit out the--
- Same as the table, right?
Just plain text.
- Yeah, just like requirements.txt.
- Yeah. - Got it, okay.
Yeah, excellent.
What do you recommend?
So there's the hatch run commands,
which will use the environment,
or you could just go into the shell and run it.
Or if I'm sneaky and I put my virtual environment in there,
I might have something that automatically detects
that environment and picks it up.
So for example, PyCharm might go,
you know what, I see a VE in V folder,
we'll use that and just grab it
not care about hatch directly.
That's actually one of the reasons I was asking about putting it locally is it's kind of a
hassle to find that thing and tell your editor, "Go find it over here," whereas it automatically
finds the top level of project variants.
Yeah, definitely.
Yeah, so you can do, as we talked about, setting in the current directory like a .vnv.
And yeah, Python, VS Code, they'll pick it up
'cause it is just a virtual environment at the end of the day.
Nothing too special.
- Got it.
- Yeah, it'll work out in the box.
- Yeah, and Colette's out there in the audience
has got us covered.
Piptools command is pipcompile rebuild output file
such and such pyproject.txt from pyproject.toml.
Yeah, cool.
- Nice.
- Yeah, and variations on that, I suspect.
So one thing that I was thinking about this,
that I expected Hatch to do, and maybe it does,
and maybe it doesn't, I just don't know,
is suppose I want to use requests for Kalki.
Like Kalki can't run locally.
It needs its calculator API service
that it's going to connect to.
So it needs a request or HTTPS or something.
- Yeah.
- How would I, is there a way with Hatch to say,
I have a new requirement, set that up,
put it in the PyProject Toml, install it?
And that's going to come with the Lockfile plugin.
I figured it wouldn't make sense to add those commands
until I knew how locking would work.
Because adding and removing always
hits the locking logic.
And since there wasn't locking, it
didn't make sense to me to add those commands.
So it's going to come soon.
So right now, you would just modify your pyproject.toml
until those are added.
- And then I think there's a way where
Hatch looked at your PyProject Toml
and said, okay, you're gonna need these dependencies,
right, when you run it?
- In what sense?
- I thought it installed the dependencies
in PyProject Toml, even if it won't edit it.
Like if I put something in there and I try to run it,
it'll say I need this.
- Yeah, it'll sync it automatically, yeah.
- Oh, what command do I use to do that one?
either a run command or the shell command.
- Right, I see.
Oh, even the shell will do it, huh?
- Yeah.
Yeah, so if you do,
if you do hatch run pip list, for example.
- Yeah.
- Okay, now in pyproject.toml,
add like requests, maybe to the dependency.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Um
Right again, yeah
There you go. I see you
Yeah, right now I have requests and like friends requests. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
Okay, that's pretty cool
Nice and then i'm looking forward to the lock stuff because I absolutely love pip tools. I think it is a glorious
Way I used for a while I used um
I'm like, you know, could you just package this up?
And so now I just started periodically,
I just go, okay, I'm gonna use pip tools
and just ask, how has the world changed?
And then update my stuff in a more sane way.
- Yeah, yeah, it was a bit noisy for us too.
At work, we have like a custom dependency update logic
that we can use to update our stuff.
And so we're like, okay, I'm gonna use pip tools
and just ask, how has the world changed?
dependency update logic as well.
I think there is an open feature request
for a dependent bot to chunk the updates,
but I don't know if it has happened.
- Yeah, I think I've seen one of those for a couple years
and there was like a hundred plus one, me too, me too.
Like I got to review these things.
I don't know if it's there.
It's not there on my projects.
It's still, I'll get 20, I'll do a pip compile update
and I'll push that and I'll get like 20 messages.
These are no longer required.
I'm like, okay, thanks.
(laughing)
Could you just batch them?
You know, anyway.
- Yeah.
- Okay, so, so calc is coming along here.
Let's just imagine that it does good stuff.
I haven't even written any code for it,
but it depends upon requests.
So that's a start.
The next step, going kind of forking
on the various possible definitions
of what packaging is,
a next step for this thing might be,
I want to put it onto PyPI or create a wheel I can share.
So Hatch also supports that, right?
- Yeah, so first you have to create the artifacts.
So you would do Hatch build,
and that would build by default
both the source distribution and the wheel.
Yeah. - Okay.
- So now in your current directory,
just like the other tools,
there's gonna be a dist,
d-i-s-t,
that now has those.
And if you run a hatch publish,
that would put it on PyPI by default.
And it would prompt you for your username.
- I'm not entering that.
I don't wanna own Kalki on PyPI.
No, just kidding.
But yeah, I don't think I have it configured,
so it wouldn't really do anything.
But it would, it would go and put it on PyPI, right?
- Yeah, yeah. - Potentially.
Yeah, and that's pretty straightforward.
You also point out in the docs that
CI build wheel and things like TOCs,
you could be the build-- just Hatchling could be the build
system for that, right?
Yeah, every-- yeah, because Hatch--
Hatch does a lot.
So you can use parts.
Say you wanted to only use environment management
to replace TOCs or NOCs, you could do that.
If you wanted to only use Hatchling with CI build wheel
or other tools, you could do that.
If you wanted to only use the version management,
you could do that.
It's kind of choose whatever you want.
Yeah, you're not locked in.
- Yeah.
Yeah, so the last thing I could do is publish,
but I'm not really gonna go.
- Yeah, yeah.
- There's also a way to set in the config file.
You said that if I set into the config file
under the publish index, disable true,
where you can make it confirm
rather than just straight up publishing it, right?
- Yeah, that was a feature request.
Yep, so. - Yeah, cool.
Another thing that I've always stumbled on
when I do this, at least with Twine,
is I'll have some project, I've done this,
I've published a version, later I'll come back to it,
I'll make some changes, I'll increment the version.
I used to have to do that manually,
but now I can just do a hatched version
And then, you know, then like, I could build one again.
- Minor. - Minor, yeah.
- There we go.
It'll automatically change it.
And that changes the code, which is great.
So now if I do a hatch build, which is really nice,
it'll create a new one.
But if I look in my project,
I've got the old one and the new one,
and you can't republish the old one, I don't think.
So what happens if I just say publish now,
and I've already got 0.1.0 out there?
- Yeah, so you can do hatch build dash C for clean,
and it should clean it first.
- Okay, that's cool, because then I can just say
hatch publish and not worry about conflicts.
- Yeah, also anything that exists already on PyPI,
it will ignore, it'll put a warning,
but it won't fail the command.
I think time by default does fail.
- I think it does as well. - And you have to pass
a blank, so I do the inverse,
because that was frustrating to me too.
So I do the opposite, yeah.
- Perfect, I love it.
Okay, yeah, that's a really cool aspect.
And so, yeah, that was, I guess, walking through that.
I think it was neat to just kind of explore it together,
so thanks for talking me through that.
- Yeah, yeah, and yeah,
The past month I've been pretty busy at work,
but I'm going to pick up development again next week
for Hatch.
There's a bunch of open feature requests I have to crank out.
Yeah, that's a pretty popular project on GitHub
with 3.7 thousand stars.
So I suspect there's some user feedback.
Yep.
So I guess the main next features
are the lock file plugin mechanism.
And also people are asking about workspaces,
which is basically like, kind of like editable installs,
but more built in and fundamental.
So I'm gonna add that, especially useful for monorepos.
- Oh, right, okay.
You don't necessarily wanna hatch build all of Google
or whatever, right?
- Right, right, right.
- So a workspace is like a view into the monorepo.
I said, I know there's like 500 projects here
and they all have their things,
but I want the web app and the data layer.
That's it.
Something like that. - Right, exactly, yeah.
- Okay.
That sounds useful.
- Yeah, and I'm modeling it after cargo workspaces and Rust.
I worked with that recently
And I think they have pretty good config
and a model of how local development works.
>> Okay, yeah, that sounds really good.
>> Yeah, if you want a preview of what Hatch will look like,
it's basically cargo workspaces.
>> Nice. Jonathan out there says,
that sounds like music to his ears,
definitely waiting on the workspaces feature
for our monorepo work.
>> Nice.
And then also Ryan is asking you,
any chance there could be a package build target?
I'm using Packs via Talks currently.
- Yes, that's possible.
One thing that's great about plugins
is I don't have to do every feature.
Anybody can do that.
So we do have a few to the docs and go to the top,
plugins,
builder.
>> Oh, builder, yeah.
>> And then reference.
Yep.
And then, yeah, so known third party.
So here's some examples of third party builder plugins.
So the build command that you ran,
it has an option to output a target, a named target,
other than we will run sdist.
So you can write an arbitrary builder
and build those targets.
So yeah.
- Okay, it's probably not super hard to do, I'm guessing,
to just like basically bundle up the commands
to build the pecs.
- Yeah, and just implement the interface,
and that's all you gotta do.
- Yeah, okay, yeah, excellent.
Good to hear.
So I vote for the lock file management,
the dependency management.
I'm excited to hear that that's coming.
- Yep, that's coming next.
Are you thinking of building on something like pip-tools
or doing your own?
I wouldn't feel confident doing my own
without feedback from other folks that
have been in this for longer, like Brett Cannon.
I think he wrote the first black file pip attempt last year.
For various reasons, it kind of got rejected.
But I think his next attempt will happen.
I just don't know when.
All right.
Excellent, excellent.
There's also a suggestion of a Cython builder would be cool.
Maybe a mypyC.
I don't know.
There's a lot of--
That one exists, actually.
Oh, the mypyC one does?
OK.
Yeah, go back to the plugins.
I know the docs are a lot.
Sorry.
Back one, build hook.
And then reference.
And it's listed under third-party Hatchling.py.
I'm maintaining that one, actually.
>>Okay, nice.
>>Actually, I have black builds with that now.
>>Nice.
>>Yeah.
>>What about the Jupyter Builder?
What does that do?
>>So recently, Jupyter switched their entire extension
ecosystem to Hatchling, actually.
So now the standard way to do Jupyter stuff is with Hatchling.
And that's the plugin that everything happens with.
>>Nice.
OK, cool.
Probably makes you feel good to see major projects
like that using your tools.
>>Yeah, yeah.
I'm happy that people are finding value in it.
And every time someone says, oh, it's so easy to use,
yeah, it makes me happy.
Yeah, indeed.
I like stuff that I can do a lot, but it's very simple.
That's my purpose.
Yeah, I think I might play with the global config
to see how close I can make it match my current workflow
and make it kind of coexist what I'm doing.
So that'd be fun.
Awesome.
All right, well, I think we're about out of time.
Anything else you want to throw out there while we're
talking about the project?
>>No, just if anybody wants to contribute,
there's lots of open issues.
I have had lots of really nice contributors.
They almost finished adding type printing everywhere.
Like in the beginning, I had zero type printing.
And then a bunch of contributors helped out with that.
And now it's almost fully my part.
>>Yeah, that's awesome.
- Yeah.
- Cool, yeah, I saw you had 40 contributors,
so that's really cool.
- Yeah.
- Maybe one other quick comment
that I'd like to ask you about here is,
I see the domain this is on is hatch.pypa,
it's in Python Packaging Authority, .io.
How'd it end up on pypa.io versus,
yeah, hatch.dev or whatever?
Yeah, so this is just the standard domain for all the packages.
So if you type in pip right in a hatch and get rid of the latest part, it'll go right to the pip docs.
Right, right, right.
So when it was adopted...
Tell us more about how did it become sort of official?
Oh yeah, so I announced hatch 1.0, like the rewrite that happened last year sometime.
And then the same day, maybe the next day, I forget who, but somebody in the Discord
was asking if I wanted to join the PyPA.
And I was like, "Well, sure.
That makes sense."
So then there was a vote on the mailing list, and it was unanimous that they agreed.
And then after, I think, seven or ten days, then we transferred the repo, and it was hosted
on the new domain.
- Right, okay, oh yeah, and it's also
under the GitHub organization of PyPA, that's right.
- Yep. - Yeah, cool.
Excellent, all right, well, really nice project.
Congrats on all the uptake and--
- Thanks. - Yeah, it looks like
people are enjoying it.
So two quick questions before you get out of here.
I didn't get to ask you this on the panel
because one, we're over time,
and two, there was a bunch of people
in order just another 10 minute debate.
But if, first of all, notable PyPI package,
something that you've come across,
this is super cool, people should know about package X.
Anything come to mind?
- I guess it's a bit cliche
'cause right now it's actually pretty popular,
but I would still evangelize Textool.
Textool is like a new application for building T-Rise,
which is like Textool, like user interfaces.
And I've actually been doing a project at work
that uses this and it's very nice.
It's pretty awesome.
- It's kind of nuts what this thing does.
- Yeah.
- This is like the higher order UI framework
built on rich by Wilma Guggenheim and team.
And you get like fly out docking panels
and scrolling in.
Yeah, it's like,
kind of like if the web could be in a terminal.
(laughs)
- True. - I like that.
- It's true.
I plan to actually use this for Hatch when I have time.
On the creation, the interactive creation of a new project,
on the left-hand side, you would have like inputs,
and then it would render the PyProject.toml
on the right-hand side and markdown.
- Okay, oh, that's super cool.
- In a few months, yeah.
- Yeah, fun.
And then if you're gonna work on Hatch,
What editor are you using these days?
- PyCharm.
PyCharm for large projects.
When I'm doing like one-off scripts, then VS Code.
- Yeah. - Okay, cool.
This may be a question I gotta start asking people.
I don't know.
PyCharm is, and all the JetBrains IDs, I believe,
are starting to promote a, what they call the new UI,
which I think is much more like VS Code.
Are you the old school style or are you the new UI style?
- I've not seen that yet actually.
- There's a gear in the upper right.
If you click on it, it'll say new UI.
To me, I'm old school.
I love the old one.
I mean, I'm using PyCharm, not VS Code for a reason.
So I don't want it to look more like VS Code
for my style, right?
But I know other people prefer the opposite.
- Yeah.
I wouldn't mind using VS Code.
There's one missing feature that is like a blocker,
where I just won't use VS Code full time,
which is it can't yet do vertical tabs.
There's an open feature for years.
And I guess technically, there's some kind of challenge
to implementing that.
So right now, if you have like 100 tabs,
it doesn't look very nice.
It's all horizontal.
>>Aaron: It's just a bunch of X's.
[LAUGHS]
>>Zuko: Yeah.
>>Aaron: I can't select them.
I just closed them.
>>Zuko: Yeah.
>>Aaron: Yeah, I got it.
Okay, very cool.
All right, well, congrats with Hatch
and thanks for coming on the show.
- Yeah, thank you very much.
Nice talking to you.
- Yeah, you too, bye-bye.
- All right, bye-bye.